Current reading: Pierce

Current reading: James

reality is "what truths have to take acount of". 
reality is three parts
	flux of our sensations
	relations between sensations
		some are inessential (eg, it rained yesterday)
		others are essential (eg, it rains in the winter)
	past ideas
reality is not true or false; truth applies to the relationship between ideas and realities
we select what to pay attention to and "stand out" of reality
Who is the human agent for james?
	highly individualized
agents have to do something to make the world a better place
since you inform reality, it's your responsibility?
James's ultimate goal is working out a compromise between empericism and rationalism: question of religion
pragmatism is going to take religion from rationalists to empericists; a kind of emperic religion
religion is good because it creates an immensely powerful personal experience
Meliorism: positive change is possible, but not assured - and only through your actions
religion is NOT like Pascal's wager. You cannot logic yourself into religion... it's good if you can, but there's no point to trying to force yourself

Overall notes: 
	"Ideas are created not by individuals, but by groups of individuals...and are entirely dependent on their carries and on the environment"
	Oh, that's where it gets Hegelian!

Class Day 1
	Overview
		Classical Pragmatism: Peirce, James, Dewey, & sometimes Mead
		Alain Locke: First Black Rhodes Scholar and of the Harlem Renaissance
		Rorty: THE SOUTHLAND TALES OF PHILOSOPHY. buy his book Philosophy And Social Hope
		Setting the stage: Post-Kant a division between Rationalism and Empiricism
	Peirce: 
		A "Harvard Brat" raised by a great mathmatecian and taught to read all the classics
		Studied chemistry Harvard and was a scientist for all his life
		Spoiled, constantly in pain, irascible
	James and Peirce met at the Metaphysical Club in Harvard
	James: 
		Incredibly charismatic
	No unified names:
		Dewey: Instrumentalism
		James & Peirce: Pragmatism
		Peirce: Pragmaticism
		Rorty: Neopragmatism
		Locke: Cultural Pragmatism
	What is reality? Is there a reality beyond expressions of ideas?
	Pragmatism is an "idea about ideas": it applies to concepts, philosophies, ideology... all sorts
	Big problem: question of Subjectivity versus Objectivity. Is Pragmatism subjective, & if so is that acceptable?		
	Pragmatism is not universal! It is suited for a specific historical moment
	James is an individualist... but what about the social aspect
	Who influenced the Pragmatists?
		Darwin's theory of evolution
		Scientific method
		Empiricism
		Democracy
	What is their worldview?
		A quiet scepticism of dogmatism and ideology. 
		Anti-Cartesianism
		Fallibleism
		Pluralism: all experience is real experience
		Radicalism: sense data is not atomistic
		Ameliorist: it is possible for the world to get better
		Truth can only be found by a community of seekers, not by an individual
		
Thdcxz Development of American Pragmatism, John Dewey, 1925
    Pragmatism originates with mtahmetician Charles Sanders Pierce
        Inspired by Kant's division between practical (a priori) and pragmatic (a postieri) ethics
        "In order to attribute a meaning to concepts, one must be able to apply them to existence" - what does this mean?
        To be American philosophy can mean to protest American life, not just to express it
        Inspired by science: theory means nothing unless it is proven
    William James
        "the effective meaning of any philosophic proposition can be brought down to some practical consequence... whether active or passive"
        Practical: individual, particular, effective
        interested in determining whether a given philosophical question was meaningful or trivial
        Will to be believe / right to believe: beliefs are chosen based on our attraction to the form of life they lead to, not their truth
        because ideas have consequences, the world is not static and mechanical- it can be changed by thought
     Wait a minute... is this Hegelianism?
        No; not teleological.
    American thought is a continuation of European thought, adapted for distinctly american conditions    
